

Citation: Ahn, K.; Rakha, H.A.
Developing a Hydrogen Fuel Cell
Vehicle (HFCV) Energy Consumption
Model for Transportation
Applications. Energies 2022, 15, 529.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en15020529
Academic Editors: Antonio Zuorro
and Alok Kumar Patel
Received: 22 November 2021
Accepted: 4 January 2022
Published: 12 January 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
energies
Article
Developing a Hydrogen Fuel Cell Vehicle (HFCV) Energy
Consumption Model for Transportation Applications
Kyoungho Ahn 1
and Hesham A. Rakha 2,*
1
Virginia Tech Transportation Institute, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA; kahn@vt.edu
2
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
*
Correspondence: hrakha@vt.edu
Abstract: This paper presents a simple hydrogen fuel cell vehicle (HFCV) energy consumption model.
Simple fuel/energy consumption models have been developed and employed to estimate the energy
and environmental impacts of various transportation projects for internal combustion engine vehicles
(ICEVs), battery electric vehicles (BEVs), and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs). However, there are
few published results on HFCV energy models that can be simply implemented in transportation
applications. The proposed HFCV energy model computes instantaneous energy consumption
utilizing instantaneous vehicle speed, acceleration, and roadway grade as input variables. The mode
accurately estimates energy consumption, generating errors of 0.86% and 2.17% relative to laboratory
data for the fuel cell estimation and the total energy estimation, respectively. Furthermore, this work
validated the proposed model against independent data and found that the new model accurately
estimated the energy consumption, producing an error of 1.9% and 1.0% relative to empirical data for
the fuel cell and the total energy estimation, respectively. The results demonstrate that transportation
engineers, policy makers, automakers, and environmental engineers can use the proposed model to
evaluate the energy consumption effects of transportation projects and connected and automated
vehicle (CAV) transportation applications within microscopic trafﬁc simulation models.
Keywords: hydrogen fuel cell vehicle (HFCV); energy consumption model; microscopic energy model
1. Introduction
The objective of this study is to develop a microscopic energy consumption model of
hydrogen fuel cell vehicles (HFCVs) that can accommodate real-time connected automated
vehicle (CAV) transportation applications. Based on a recent United States Environmental
Protection Agency (US EPA) report, a typical internal combustion engine passenger ve-
hicle emits about 4.6 metric tons of carbon dioxide per year [1]. Many governments and
vehicle manufacturers around the world are promoting the development and support of
alternative fuel vehicles, which do not use traditional petroleum fuels, to address these
environmental concerns. The HFCV is an alternative fuel vehicle that relies on hydrogen
fuel for vehicle power.
An HFCV is an electric car since it uses an electric powertrain. Similar to a battery
electric vehicle (BEV), HFCVs utilize electric motors for propulsion as opposed to more
“traditional” internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs). The fuel cell generates electricity
to power the vehicle and charges a battery. Fuel cells in the HFCV generate electricity
through a chemical reaction process that utilizes oxygen and a fuel source of compressed
hydrogen gas.
A major benefit of HFCVs compared to BEVs is the refueling time. BEVs can take from
20 min to overnight to recharge, depending on the charger type and battery size. Level 1
chargers, typical home outlet chargers (110 volts) in the US, take 17–20 h to charge a 100-mile-
range car battery. Level 2 chargers that use a 240-volt outlet reduce the charging time to 4–5 h
for the same range. If a BEV can handle a fast charging outlet, the charging time can be less
Energies 2022, 15, 529. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15020529
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

Energies 2022, 15, 529
2 of 15
than 30 min to charge up to 80% of full range using DC fast charging stations. However, for
an HFCV, the fueling time is similar to gasoline or diesel vehicles. The fueling time of HFCVs
is approximately 5 min or less to fully refuel a tank of hydrogen [2].
A typical HFCV has a battery pack that stores energy generated from regenerative
braking. It also provides supplemental power to the electric traction motor similar to
hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs). The HFCV battery can also power auxiliary loads and
reduce engine idling when fuel cells are not used. Although an HFCV can be designed as a
plug-in hybrid hydrogen vehicle that can charge the battery, most HFCVs do not have a
charging function and use a smaller battery compared to a BEV battery. The driving range
of BEVs is determined by the size of the battery. An HFCV’s driving range, as well as the
amount of power and energy consumed for the vehicle’s operations, is instead determined
by the hydrogen fuel tank size.
The energy consumption patterns of different vehicles, including ICEVs and BEVs, are
signiﬁcantly different with regard to driving cycles. A previous study found that ICEVs
are more fuel-efﬁcient in high-speed freeway operational conditions, while BEVs are more
energy efﬁcient on low-speed arterial trips. Furthermore, the study found that a test ICEV
had similar fuel consumption rates on a Freeway G cycle and a Local cycle but that BEV’s
energy consumption rates on these two cycles were signiﬁcantly different due to the BEV’s
regenerative braking system [3,4]. We expect that HFCVs will have a different energy
consumption pattern due to their regenerative braking system.
The proposed fuel consumption model estimates an HFCV’s instantaneous energy con-
sumption using vehicle operational input variables, including the vehicle’s instantaneous
speed, acceleration, and roadway grade, which can be easily obtained from stand-alone
Global Positioning System (GPS) loggers or various smartphone applications. The pro-
posed model ﬁlls a void in the state-of-the-art given that it develops a simple model that
can be applied in smartphone applications and microscopic trafﬁc simulators.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: the next section reports the
state-of-the art of HFCV energy consumption modeling efforts. Subsequently, the paper
describes the HFCV fuel consumption data that were utilized for this study. The next
sections explain the proposed model development and the validation results. Finally, the
conclusions of the study are summarized.
2. Literature Review
Acar and Dincer investigated the role of hydrogen as a sustainable transportation fuel
to reduce transportation emissions [5]. The study compared ICEVs, HEVs, BEVs, biofuel
vehicles, HFCVs, and hydrogen-fueled ICE vehicles for their CO2 and SO2 emissions, social
cost of carbon, energy and exergy efﬁciencies, fuel consumption, fuel price, and driving
range. The study concluded that fuel cell vehicles have the highest average performance
ranking for a sustainable transportation option and emphasized that hydrogen should be
produced from renewable energy and material resources with zero or minimal emissions at
high efﬁciencies in order to become a truly sustainable and clean fuel. Kurtz et al. reviewed
transportation hydrogen infrastructure performance and reliability [6]. The study inves-
tigated the engineering and deployment of modern hydrogen infrastructure, including
the costs, beneﬁts, and operational considerations, as well as technical difﬁculties for the
expansion of hydrogen infrastructure. The study identiﬁed the low reliability, high mainte-
nance costs, and limited availability of modern hydrogen stations as the major technical
hurdles to large-scale hydrogen system commercialization. The study recommended that
to achieve the economic and sustainability goals for more widespread hydrogen-fueled
transportation, the industry must overcome near-term hydrogen infrastructure challenges
by supporting hydrogen stations with low cost, high reliability, and high availability.
Li et al. evaluated a Kriging-based bi-objective constrained optimization (KBCO)
algorithm for the fuel economy of HFCVs [7]. An HFCV has a complex electro-mechanical
and hydraulic control system that includes a number of control parameters. The study
developed a KBCO algorithm that can be used for the parameter optimization of HFCV

Energies 2022, 15, 529
3 of 15
control to improve HFCV performance. The study utilized the automotive simulation
platform ADVISOR (ADvanced VehIcle SimulatOR) that was created by the US Department
of Energy’s National Renewable Energy Laboratory [8,9] to perform simulation analysis of
an HFCV. The study claimed that the proposed algorithm is effective in solving constrained
optimization problems for the energy control strategy of hydrogen fuel cells and battery,
and minimizing the hydrogen consumption under the constraints of velocity, accelerating
performance, and battery charge state.
Xu et al. developed a dynamic model for fuel cell electric vehicles to improve both
energy efﬁciency and system durability [10]. The study deﬁned a multi-objective optimiza-
tion problem for the fuel cell electric vehicle control system and adapted a quasi-optimal
solution using a two-loop framework based on a dynamic programming algorithm and
the Pareto optimal principle. The study tested the algorithm on a fuel cell city bus, ﬁnding
the optimum battery capacity and a fuel cell maximal net output for the fuel economy and
system durability of that bus.
Kaya and Hames also investigated control strategies for HFCVs to save energy [11].
The study considered two different control strategies developed on HFCVs and compared
them with the state machine control strategy. Additionally, the study examined system
efﬁciency, fuel consumption, lifespan of vehicle technology, and vehicle performance by
working with different HFCV control mechanisms. The study claimed that the proposed
control strategies could be easily applied to different HFCVs with minor changes due to the
simplicity of their structure and parameters. Shusheng et al. analyzed the basic structure of
an onboard hydrogen-producing fuel cell electric vehicle and tested a hybrid drive model
and a pure fuel cell drive model on the ADVISOR simulation platform [12]. The study
found that fuel cells and lithium batteries work in a highly efﬁcient manner but the output
power of fuel cells has smaller ﬂuctuations, improving energy utilization efﬁciency and
extending the service life of the fuel cell in the hybrid drive model.
Caux et al. investigated energy management strategies for a hybrid fuel cell vehi-
cle [13]. The study proposed an energy management model that solves a combinatorial
optimization problem for the storage element and discretization of the space of the fuel cell
to improve the quality of decisions for the energy management system. The approach repli-
cates the operation of the HFCV energy chain to provide an optimal solution for hydrogen
consumption. Simulation studies found that the proposed energy management strategies
could signiﬁcantly improve the solution quality and computational time compared to other
approaches.
A previous study demonstrated that a fuel/energy model was developed with a
special interest in measuring fuel/energy consumption for transportation planning, trans-
portation impact assessments, vehicle technology evaluations, trafﬁc simulation models,
and speciﬁc control conditions [14]. In order to be utilized for real-time CAV transporta-
tion applications, there are several requirements for an ideal fuel/energy consumption
model. Rakha et al. recommended four major criteria: real-time computation, accuracy,
model structure, and model calibration simplicity [15]. The model should have a simple
structure that does not require resource-demanding computations and which can be used
for real-time computations using instantaneous vehicle operational data. In addition, the
model should provide reasonable accuracy with the fewest input variables and should be
applicable for general vehicle populations. In this paper, we attempt to develop an HFCV
energy model that can accommodate these requirements.
A number of studies developed and investigated the power management models
of HFCVs to improve the energy consumption and efﬁciencies of the fuel cell system.
However, there is little previous research on HFCV energy consumption models that
can be implemented into transportation applications, while a number of such energy
consumption models are available for ICEVs, BEVs, and HEVs. This study develops an
energy consumption model that can be utilized in various transportation applications.
The contribution of the study is to develop a microscopic energy consumption model
for HFCVs to quantify their energy impacts on real-time CAV transportation applications

Energies 2022, 15, 529
4 of 15
within trafﬁc simulation models. Unlike previous work, the HFCV energy consumption
model uses the vehicle’s instantaneous speed, acceleration, and roadway grade data as
input variables, given that they can be easily obtained from stand-alone GPS loggers
or various smartphone applications. Because of its simplicity, the model can be easily
integrated within microscopic trafﬁc simulation models and in-vehicle and smartphone
applications to quantify HFCV energy consumption.
3. Hydrogen Energy Consumption Data
This study utilized a test dataset that was collected in a controlled laboratory en-
vironment at the Argonne National Laboratory. The test vehicle, a 2017 Toyota Mirai,
includes a 114 kW hydrogen fuel cell stack and 1.6 kWh nickel–metal hydride battery
to control the allocation of energy between the fuel cell electric and the battery power
paths. The hydrogen storage of the test vehicle is 10,000 psi, 5 kg of H2. The study
used public data that are available on the Downloadable Dynamometer Database (https:
//www.anl.gov/es/downloadable-dynamometer-database, access data: 4 November 2021).
The data were collected by the Fuel Cell Technologies Ofﬁce at the US Department of Energy
(US DOE), and tested in collaboration with Transport Canada’s Innovation Centre. This
study utilized the 10-hertz energy consumption data of the 2017 Toyota Mirai to develop
an HFCV energy consumption model.
We utilized three driving data cycles, including the Urban Dynamometer Driving
Schedule (UDDS), the Highway Fuel Economy Test (HWFET), and the New European
Driving Cycle (NEDC). Table 1 shows the driving characteristics of the three driving cycles.
The UDDS (also called LA-4 cycle) simulates an urban route with frequent stops. The
driving cycle is typically used for light duty vehicle testing. The HWFET was developed
by the US EPA to simulate highway driving conditions for light duty vehicles. NEDC was
developed to represent the typical usage of a car in Europe. The driving cycle consists
of four repeated ECE-15 urban driving cycles (UDC) and one extra-urban driving cycle
(EUDC). The cycle was designed to assess the emission levels of car engines and fuel
economy in passenger cars. However, NEDC is also used to estimate the electric power
consumption and driving range of HEVs and BEVs. This study utilized the data collected
with hot-stabilized conditions without using air condition and used neither cold-start data
nor the data collected under hot and cold weather conditions. Figure 1 shows the speed
proﬁles of the three driving cycles. The study utilized two repeated driving cycle data of
the Highway cycle and NEDC cycle.
Table 1. Driving cycle characteristics.
UDDS
Highway
NEDC
Distance (km)
12.07
16.45
10.93
Total time (s)
1372
756
1180
Idle time (s)
266
6
267
Average speed including stops (km/h)
31.5
77.23
33.35
Average driving speed (km/h)
38.90
77.70
43.10
Maximum speed (km/h)
91.25
95.95
120
Maximum acceleration (m/s2)
1.76
1.67
1.04

Energies 2022, 15, 529
5 of 15
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 1. Driving cycles used for hydrogen vehicle energy modeling: (a) UDDS (city) cycle; (b) high-
way cycle; (c) NEDC cycle.
4. HFCV Energy Consumption Modeling
It is difﬁcult to estimate the energy consumption of HFCVs due to the complexity of
their fuel cell and battery components. The powertrain of an HFCV includes a fuel cell
stack, a battery pack, a power electronic controller, an electric traction motor, and a DC/DC
converter [16]. The fuel cell stack is an assembly of individual fuel cells that use hydrogen
and oxygen to produce electricity. The battery pack is a battery that stores energy generated
from regenerative braking and provides supplemental power to the electric traction motor.
The power electronics controller manages the ﬂow of electrical energy delivered by the
fuel cell and the traction battery, controlling the speed of the electric traction motor and

Energies 2022, 15, 529
6 of 15
the torque it produces. The electric traction motor drives the vehicle’s wheels using power
from the fuel cell and the battery pack. The DC/DC converter converts higher-voltage DC
power from the traction battery pack to the lower-voltage DC power needed to run vehicle
accessories and recharge the auxiliary battery.
Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between an HFCV’s vehicle speed and energy con-
sumption. As illustrated in the ﬁgure, the vehicle’s energy consumption rates and fuel cell
power consumption are signiﬁcantly affected by vehicle speed. The ﬁgure demonstrates
that the power generated by the fuel cell is signiﬁcantly higher than the power generated
by the battery. It also demonstrates that the battery provides limited supplemental power
to the electric traction motor. Figure 3 illustrates the battery and the fuel cell power con-
sumption for a low-speed section and a high-speed section of the NEDC cycle. Figure 3a,b
demonstrate that the vehicle is mostly powered by the battery during idling and low-speed
conditions and the fuel cell powers the motor only during acceleration events. Figure 3c,d
demonstrate that the vehicle utilizes the battery as supplemental power during acceleration
events and the fuel cell provides the main power to the electric motor on the high-speed
section. The ﬁgure demonstrates that the HFCV uses the battery mode when signiﬁcant
vehicle power is not required, as shown in the low-speed case.
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2. Cont.

Energies 2022, 15, 529
7 of 15
(c) 
Figure 2. Relationship of vehicle speed and energy consumption: (a) total energy consumption;
(b) fuel cell energy consumption; (c) battery energy consumption.
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 3. Cont.

Energies 2022, 15, 529
8 of 15
 
(d) 
Figure 3. Relationship of fuel cell power consumption vs. NEDC cycle power consumption: (a) bat-
tery energy consumption—low speed; (b) fuel cell energy consumption—low speed; (c) battery
energy consumption—high speed; (d) fuel cell energy consumption—high speed.
Vehicle fuel/energy consumption rates are typically derived from a relationship be-
tween instantaneous fuel/energy consumption rates and instantaneous measurements of
various explanatory variables such as vehicle power, force (or tractive effort), acceleration,
speed, and/or roadway conditions. Figure 4 illustrates the relationship between fuel cell en-
ergy consumption and the power at the wheels from the Toyota Mirai data. Figures 4 and 5
demonstrate that the vehicle power at the wheels is highly correlated with the fuel cell
power consumption.
 
Figure 4. Fuel cell energy consumption vs. the power at the wheels.
 
Figure 5. FHCV power consumption modeling diagram.

Energies 2022, 15, 529
9 of 15
This study found the following HFCV energy consumption behaviors. First, vehicle
speed and power affects FHCV energy consumption; second, when the vehicle power
(Pwheels) is lower than a speciﬁc value (Pa), the HFCV utilizes the battery mode; third, when
the speed is lower than a speciﬁc speed (va) and the power at the wheels is between Pa
and Pb, the HFCV is operated in battery mode; fourth, the HFCV utilizes only the fuel
cell mode when the speed is greater than a battery mode speed (va) and the power at the
wheels is between Pa and Pb; and ﬁfth, the HFCV utilizes both the fuel cell and battery
modes when the power (Pwheels) is greater than a speciﬁc power (Pb). The power at the
wheels (Pwheels) is computed using Equation (1). The proposed HFCV energy consumption
model is formulated in Equations (2)–(5).
PWheels(t) = max


0,

ma(t) + mg
Cr
1000(c1v(t) + c2) +
1
2×3.62 ρAirA f CDv2(t) + mg θ

v(t)
3.6


,
(1)
Pbattery(t) =







PWheels(t) + Paux
for PWheels ≤Pa
PWheels(t) + Paux
for Pa < PWheels ≤Pb and v(t) ≤va
Pidle + Paux
for Pa < PWheels ≤Pb and v(t) > va
PWheels(t) ∗α + Paux
for PWheels ≥Pb
,
(2)
PFuelCell(t) =







Pidle
for PWheels ≤Pa
Pidle
for Pa < PWheels ≤Pb and v(t) ≤va
PWheels(t) ∗β for Pa < PWheels ≤Pb and v(t) > va
PWheels(t) ∗β
for PWheels ≥Pb
,
(3)
PHFCV(t) = Pbattery(t) + PFuelCell(t),
(4)
EC(t) = PHFCV(t) × ∆t
(5)
The proposed model is general and is applied to the 2017 Toyota Mirai for illustration
purposes. Here, m is the vehicle mass (m = 1928 kg for the curb weight of the test Toyota
Mirai), a(t) = dv(t)/dt is the acceleration of the vehicle in m/s2 after ensuring that the
vehicle speed is converted to m/s (a(t) takes negative values when the vehicle decelerates),
g = 9.8066 m/s2 is the gravitational acceleration, θ is the road grade, Cr = 1.75, c1 = 0.0328
and c2 = 4.575 are the rolling resistance parameters that vary as a function of the road
surface type, road condition, and vehicle tire type. The typical values of vehicle coefﬁcients
are reported in. ρAir = 1.2256 kg/m3 is the air mass energy density of hydrogen which is
equal to 33.6 kWh of usable energy per kg, A f = 2.3316 m2 is the frontal area of the vehicle,
CD is the aerodynamic drag coefﬁcient of the vehicle (taken to be 0.28), and v(t) is the
vehicle speed in km/h [17–19]. Paux is the power consumed by the auxiliary system. The
energy produced by the fuel cell ( PFuelCell(t)) is computed, given the power at the wheels,
assuming a vehicle efﬁciency of β = 93% considering a driveline efﬁciency and the electric
motor efﬁciency. The energy produced from the battery ( PBattery(t)) is computed, assuming
an efﬁciency of α = 20%. This parameter was calibrated using the HFCV battery energy
consumption data. PHFCV(t) is the instantaneous total power exerted in kilowatts. Statistical
analysis found that va is 32 km/h, Pa is 2.5 kW, and Pb is 5 kW for the speciﬁc test vehicle. In
this study, we assume the vehicle weight is a constant variable. A signiﬁcant vehicle mass
change can affect the energy consumption. The proposed model estimates the vehicle’s
energy consumption (EC) (kWh) over a time step ∆t (Equation (5)), the instantaneous
power consumed (kW), and hydrogen consumed (kg); the hydrogen storage of the test
Toyota Mirai is 5 kg. The modeling diagram is presented in Figure 5.
5. Model Validation
The model validation results demonstrate that the proposed model estimates fuel
cell energy consumption with reasonable accuracy for three representative driving cycles.
In particular, the model estimates the energy consumption with errors of 13.88%, 0.61%,
and −3.45% for the UDDS, Highway, and NEDC cycles, respectively, as demonstrated in

Energies 2022, 15, 529
10 of 15
Table 2. We found that the model overestimates the fuel cell energy consumption for the
UDDS cycle. We also found that the model slightly underestimates the fuel cell energy
consumption for the NEDC cycle when both driving cycles have similar average speeds
(31.5 km/h for UDDS and 33.35 km/h for NEDC). It seems the model was calibrated for
high speed and aggressive driving conditions, which reduced overall model accuracy. The
results showed that the overall model accuracy combining all urban and freeway driving
cycles is 0.86%.
Table 2. HFCV energy model results.
Fuel Cell Estimation
Fuel Cell and Battery Estimation
Raw Data
(kWh/km)
Estimated
(kWh/km)
Error Rate
(%)
Raw Data
(kWh/km)
Estimated
(kWh/km)
Error Rate
(%)
UDDS
0.135
0.150
13.83
0.135
0.150
−3.21
Highway
0.278
0.276
0.61
0.278
0.276
9.36
NEDC
0.295
0.285
−3.45
0.295
0.285
−3.64
Total
0.238
0.240
0.86
0.238
0.240
2.17
The study also found that the proposed model estimates the total fuel cell and battery
energy consumption with errors of −3.21%, 9.36%, and −3.64% for the three driving cycles:
UDDS, Highway, and NEDC cycles, respectively. The results demonstrate that the proposed
model accurately estimates the energy consumptions with errors of 2.17% compared to
experimental data for the total energy consumption.
Figure 6 illustrates the instantaneous fuel cell energy consumption rate and total
energy consumption rate, including both fuel cell and battery energy consumption for
the NEDC driving cycle compared to the test vehicle’s measured instantaneous energy
consumption rate. Superimposed on the ﬁgures are the proposed model’s estimates of
vehicle energy consumption rates based on instantaneous power and vehicle speed. As
illustrated in the ﬁgure, the predicted power consumption generally follows the peaks and
valleys of the measured vehicle energy consumption. The results clearly demonstrate a
good agreement between the instantaneous energy consumption estimates and laboratory
measurements. The proposed model slightly overestimates or underestimates some fuel
consumption rates for the NEDC. In particular, the proposed model underestimates fuel
consumption rates in the ﬁrst section of the driving cycle and at time 1110 s. While the
proposed model simpliﬁes the conditional battery mode, the battery mode also depends on
the battery’s state of charge (SOC). The research team will further investigate the impacts
of SOC to improve the accuracy of the energy consumption model. The test vehicle data do
not include SOC data. In general, the model predictions follow the laboratory-collected
fuel measurements of the NEDC cycle with high correlation coefﬁcients (0.942 for fuel
cell estimation, 0.975 for total energy consumption). The ﬁgure illustrates that, in general,
the model’s predictions follow the fuel measurements, demonstrating the applicability of
the model for assessing the effects of transportation projects, including eco-driving and
real-time CAV applications.
The study validated the proposed model against an independent dataset. We utilized
worldwide harmonized light vehicles test procedures (WLTPs) data that was collected
at the Argonne National Laboratory, using the same test vehicle: a 2017 Toyota Mirai.
The WLTP is a chassis dynamometer test driving cycle for the determination of emissions
and fuel consumption from light-duty vehicles, including ICEVs, HEVs, and BEVs. The
worldwide harmonized light vehicles test cycles (WLTC) and WLTP are sometimes used
interchangeably. The WLTC cycle is part of the WLTP cycle. The cycle was developed to
replace NEDC to better match the laboratory estimates of fuel/energy consumption and
emissions with on-road driving conditions. The WLTP is also used for vehicle certiﬁcation
in Japan. The WLTP cycle includes four subsections: low speed, medium speed, high speed,
and extra-high speed to represent real-world driving conditions. A detailed description of
the cycle characteristics is presented in Table 3.

Energies 2022, 15, 529
11 of 15
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6. NEDC cycle model estimation: (a) fuel cell consumption estimation; (b) fuel cell and battery
consumption estimation.
Table 3. WLTC cycle characteristics.
Low Speed
Medium Speed
High Speed
Extra-High Speed
Total
Distance (m)
3095
4756
7162
8254
23,266
Total time (s)
589
433
455
323
1800
Idle time (s)
156
48
31
7
242
Average speed including stops (km/h)
18.9
39.5
56.7
92
45.4
Average driving speed (km/h)
25.7
44.5
60.8
94
53.2
Maximum speed (km/h)
56.6
76.6
97.4
131.3
131.3
Maximum acceleration (m/s2)
1.47
1.57
1.58
1.003
1.58
Figure 7 compares the estimated energy consumption rates of HFCV and the laboratory-
collected data of WLTP cycle. The proposed model predicted that the fuel cell model
estimated 3.98 kWh while the test vehicle consumed 3.91 kWh in the laboratory, which rep-
resents a 1.9% error rate. For the total energy consumption, the model predicted 4.92 kWh
and the test vehicle consumed 4.87 kWh, which is a 1.0% error rate. A second-by-second
analysis of the fuel cell estimation and the total energy consumption is illustrated in Fig-
ure 7b. The ﬁgure demonstrates that the proposed model accurately estimates the fuel cell
energy consumption and the total energy consumption for the WLTC trip compared to the
test vehicle’s measured energy consumption rate.

Energies 2022, 15, 529
12 of 15
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 7. NEDC cycle model estimation: (a) fuel cell consumption estimation; (b) fuel cell and battery
consumption estimation.
Figure 8 illustrates the detailed instantaneous model prediction results for low-speed
and high-speed sections. The ﬁgure illustrates that the HFCV energy model estimates
accurately follow the laboratory-collected data for both low- and high-speed sections. In
particular, the model estimated 0.41 kWh for the low-speed section and 1.05 kWh for the
high-speed section, and the test vehicle consumed 0.45 kWh for the low-speed section and
1.09 kWh for the high-speed section from the fuel cell, which represent 7.9% and 4.7% errors,
respectively. The results demonstrate that the proposed model can effectively estimate the
HFCV energy consumption on both low- and high-speed sections.

Energies 2022, 15, 529
13 of 15
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 8. HFCV energy model validation for low- and high-speed sections: (a) low-speed section;
(b) high-speed section.
6. Conclusions
This study developed a simple HFCV energy consumption model that can be im-
plemented in CAV and smartphone applications and/or trafﬁc simulation software. A
number of studies investigated the power management models of HFCVs. However, only
a few studies have focused on microscopic HFCV energy consumption models that can
be implemented in CAV, smartphone, and transportation applications, while a number of
such energy consumption models are available for ICEVs, BEVs, and HEVs.
The proposed HFCV energy model utilizes instantaneous vehicle speed, acceleration,
and roadway grade as input variables to compute instantaneous hydrogen vehicle energy
consumption and total energy consumption rates. The results demonstrate that the model
estimates are generally consistent with empirical data. Speciﬁcally, the model estimates
are within 0.86% and 2.17% of the empirically observed data for the fuel cell and the
total energy consumption estimates, respectively. Furthermore, the study validated the
proposed model against independent data and found that the model accurately estimated
the energy consumption, producing an error of 1.9% and 1.0% relative to empirical data
for the fuel cell and the total energy estimation, respectively. The results provide the
opportunity for transportation engineers, policy makers, automakers, and environmental

Energies 2022, 15, 529
14 of 15
engineers to quantify the energy consumption effects of transportation projects, real-time
CAV applications, and can be incorporated in microscopic trafﬁc simulation models.
In terms of future work, we recommend a further study to investigate the optimum
parameters for other HFCVs. The current model does not consider the impacts of the
battery’s SOC, given that this information was not provided in the empirical data currently
available. We suspect that the battery mode energy consumption depends on the battery’s
SOC and, thus, recommend investigating the impact of the battery’s SOC and incorporating
it in the model to enhance the model accuracy.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.A., H.A.R.; methodology, K.A., H.A.R.; validation, K.A.,
H.A.R.; data analysis, K.A.; writing—original draft preparation, K.A.; writing—review and editing,
K.A., H.A.R. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by United State Federal Highway Administration, grant number
69A3551747123.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Nomenclature
a(t)
Acceleration of the vehicle
A f
Frontal area of the vehicle
CD
Aerodynamic drag coefﬁcient of the vehicle
Cr, c1 and c2
Rolling resistance parameters
g
Gravitational acceleration
m
Vehicle mass
Paux
Power due to the auxiliary systems
Pa
Speciﬁc power
Pb
Speciﬁc power
Pidle
idle power
Pbattery(t)
Power from battery
PFuelCell(t)
Power from fuel cell
PWheels(t)
Power at the wheels
v(t)
Vehicle speed
va
Speciﬁc vehicle speed
α, β
Vehicle-speciﬁc parameters
ρAir
Air mass density
θ
Road grade
References
1.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Greenhouse Gas Emissions from a Typical Passenger Vehicle. 2021. Available
online: https://www.epa.gov/greenvehicles/greenhouse-gas-emissions-typical-passenger-vehicle (accessed on 23 July 2021).
2.
U.S. Department of Energy. 5 Things to Know When Filling Up Your Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle. 2016. Available online:
https://www.energy.gov/eere/articles/5-things-know-when-ﬁlling-your-fuel-cell-electric-vehicle (accessed on 4 November
2021).
3.
Fiori, C.; Ahn, K.; Rakha, H.A. Power-based electric vehicle energy consumption model: Model development and validation.
Appl. Energy 2016, 168, 257–268. [CrossRef]
4.
Fiori, C.; Ahn, K.; Rakha, H.A. Optimum routing of battery electric vehicles: Insights using empirical data and microsimulation.
Transp. Res. Part D Transp. Environ. 2018, 64, 262–272. [CrossRef]
5.
Acar, C.; Dincer, I. The potential role of hydrogen as a sustainable transportation fuel to combat global warming. Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy 2020, 45, 3396–3406. [CrossRef]
6.
Kurtz, J.; Sprik, S.; Bradley, T.H. Review of transportation hydrogen infrastructure performance and reliability. Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy 2019, 44, 12010–12023. [CrossRef]

Energies 2022, 15, 529
15 of 15
7.
Li, Y.H.; Wu, Y.Z.; Zhang, Y.M.; Wang, S.T. A Kriging-based bi-objective constrained optimization method for fuel economy of
hydrogen fuel cell vehicle. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44, 29658–29670. [CrossRef]
8.
Markel, T.; Brooker, A.; Hendricks, T.; Johnson, V.; Kelly, K.; Kramer, B.; O’Keefe, M.; Sprik, S.; Wipke, K. ADVISOR: A systems
analysis tool for advanced vehicle modeling. J. Power Sources 2002, 110, 255–266. [CrossRef]
9.
Wipke, K.B.; Cuddy, M.R.; Burch, S.D. ADVISOR 2.1: A user-friendly advanced powertrain simulation using a combined
backward/forward approach. Veh. Technol. IEEE Trans. 1999, 48, 1751–1761. [CrossRef]
10.
Xu, L.F.; Mueller, C.D.; Li, J.Q.; Ouyang, M.G.; Hu, Z.Y. Multi-objective component sizing based on optimal energy management
strategy of fuel cell electric vehicles. Appl. Energy 2015, 157, 664–674. [CrossRef]
11.
Kaya, K.; Hames, Y. Two new control strategies: For hydrogen fuel saving and extend the life cycle in the hydrogen fuel cell
vehicles. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44, 18967–18980. [CrossRef]
12.
Shusheng, X.; Qiujie, S.; Baosheng, G.; Encong, Z.; Zhankuan, W. Research and development of on-board hydrogenproducing
fuel cell vehicles. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2020, 45, 17844–17857. [CrossRef]
13.
Caux, S.; Gaoua, Y.; Lopez, P. A combinatorial optimisation approach to energy management strategy for a hybrid fuel cell vehicle.
Energy 2017, 133, 219–230. [CrossRef]
14.
Ahn, K.; Rakha, H.A. A Simple Hybrid Electric Vehicle Fuel Consumption Model for Transportation Applications. In Electric and
Hybrid Vehicles; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2019.
15.
Rakha, H.A.; Ahn, K.; Moran, K.; Saerens, B.; van den Bulck, E. Virginia Tech Comprehensive Power-Based Fuel Consumption
Model: Model development and testing. Transp. Res. Part D Transp. Environ. 2011, 16, 492–503. [CrossRef]
16.
U.S. Department of Energy. How Do Fuel Cell Electric Vehicles Work Using Hydrogen? 2021. Available online: https://afdc.
energy.gov/vehicles/how-do-fuel-cell-electric-cars-work (accessed on 22 July 2021).
17.
De Gennaro, M.; Paffumi, E.; Martini, G.; Manfredi, U.; Vianelli, S.; Ortenzi, F.; Genovese, A. Experimental Test Campaign on a
Battery Electric Vehicle: Laboratory Test Results (Part 1). SAE Int. J. Altern. Powertrains 2015, 4, 100–114. [CrossRef]
18.
Department of Energy (DOE). Advanced Vehicle Testing Activity (AVTA) of the Idaho Nation Laboratory (INL). 2013. Available
online: http://avt.inel.gov/pdf/fsev/fact2013nissanleaf.pdf (accessed on 30 June 2015).
19.
Nissan Leaf. Nissan Leaf Characteristiscs. 2015. Available online: http://www.nissanusa.com/electric-cars/leaf/ (accessed on
30 June 2015).
